README.md, before:

# dynamic-sizing-lm

Upscaling and Downscaling Language Models

## Upscaling

As introduced in the research paper "Scaling Smart: Accelerating Large Language Model Pre-training with Small Model Initialization," employs the HyperCloning method to efficiently transfer knowledge from a smaller pre-trained transformer-based LLM to a larger target LLM.

This function-preserving transformation expands the hidden dimensions of the source model, precisely mapping its linear layer parameters into the destination network so that the larger model exactly replicates the source’s hidden representations and output logits at initialization.

As a result, the upscaled LLM starts with the full accuracy of the smaller model, enabling faster convergence and improved performance through subsequent fine-tuning or continued pre-training—achieving superior results under limited computational budgets compared to training from scratch (see https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12903v2).

## Downscaling

TODO: A purely mathematical formulation for downscaling has not yet been established. While a rigorous mathematical approach is not strictly required, we believe it represents the optimal path forward. By analogy, just as HyperCloning enables fast and efficient upscaling, downscaling should achieve comparable speed and efficiency. Importantly, the downscaling method must be agnostic to the upscaling technique and operate effectively on any larger transformer-based LLM, regardless of whether HyperCloning was previously applied.

## Limitations

- Dense transformer LLMs only
- Text-to-text
- SmolLM2, SmolLM3 support
- Qwen2.5, Qwen3 support
- TinyLlama support
- Phi-1.5 support

### Parameter Scaling

The HyperCloning method scales model parameters approximately as follows:
- Hidden dimensions (embeddings, attention projections): scale with n² where n = embed_dim_multiplier
- FFN intermediate dimensions: scale with m² where m = up_proj_multiplier
- Total parameters ≈ original × (n² × weight_attention + m² × weight_ffn + linear_terms)

For ~2x parameter increase, use asymmetric scaling like embed_dim_multiplier=1, up_proj_multiplier=2 (scales FFN quadratically while keeping attention size constant).

### Upscaling Limitations

- The current implementation requires `embed_dim_multiplier` and `up_proj_multiplier` to be integers; fractional values are not supported
- Although the destination network's output is valid, it may not be perfectly aligned with the source network due to numerical precision issues
- For attention layers, we recommend modifying only the number of attention heads while keeping `head_size` unchanged, as altering `head_size` would significantly increase implementation complexity

## CLI Tool

The `dslm.py` script provides a command-line interface for upscaling and downscaling language models.

### Installation

Ensure you have the required dependencies installed:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Usage

#### Describing Models

Get detailed information about a model's architecture and parameters:

```bash
# Describe Qwen3-0.6B model
python dslm.py desc --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B

# Describe Qwen2.5-0.5B model
python dslm.py desc --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B

# Describe SmolLM2-360M model
python dslm.py desc --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-360M

# Describe SmolLM3-3B model
python dslm.py desc --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B

# Describe TinyLlama_v1.1 model
python dslm.py desc --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1

# Describe Phi-1.5 model
python dslm.py desc --input microsoft/phi-1_5
```

#### Text Generation

Generate text using a model:

```bash
# Generate text with Qwen3-0.6B (default prompt)
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with Qwen2.5-0.5B (custom prompt)
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with SmolLM2-360M
python dslm.py gen --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-360M --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with SmolLM3-3B
python dslm.py gen --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with TinyLlama_v1.1
python dslm.py gen --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1 --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with Phi-1.5
python dslm.py gen --input microsoft/phi-1_5 --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with custom sampling parameters
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --n-predict 50 --temperature 0.8 --top-k 40 --top-p 0.9 --prompt "The future of AI"
```

#### Upscaling Models

Upscale a model using the HyperCloning method. Note: Parameter count scales approximately with n² where n is the multiplier for hidden dimensions. For ~2x parameter increase, use asymmetric scaling (e.g., embed-dim-multiplier 1, up-proj-multiplier 2).

```bash
# Upscale Qwen3-0.6B for ~2x parameters (keep hidden size, double FFN)
python dslm.py up --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --embed-dim-multiplier 1 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen3-0.6B-1.0B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale Qwen2.5-0.5B for ~4x parameters (double both hidden and FFN dimensions)
python dslm.py up --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen2.5-0.5B-2.0B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale SmolLM2-360M for ~4x parameters with custom output path
python dslm.py up --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-360M --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2 --output SmolLM2-360M-1.4B
python dslm.py gen --input SmolLM2-360M-1.4B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale SmolLM3-3B for ~4x parameters
python dslm.py up --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2 --output SmolLM3-3B-12.3B
python dslm.py gen --input SmolLM3-3B-12.3B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale TinyLlama_v1.1 for ~4x parameters
python dslm.py up --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1 --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input TinyLlama_v1.1-4.1B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale Phi-1.5 for ~4x parameters
python dslm.py up --input microsoft/phi-1_5 --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input phi-1_5-5.2B --prompt "The future of AI is"
```

#### Downscaling (Not Yet Implemented)

Downscaling functionality is planned but not yet implemented:

```bash
# Downscale a large Qwen3 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input Qwen/Qwen3-1.2B --output Qwen3-0.6B

# Downscale a large Qwen2.5 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-1B --output Qwen2.5-0.5B

# Downscale a large SmolLM2 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-1.4B --output SmolLM2-360M

# Downscale a large SmolLM3 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B --output SmolLM3-3B

# Downscale a large TinyLlama model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1 --output TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1
```

### Command Reference

- `desc`: Describe model architecture and parameters
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier

- `gen`: Generate text using the model
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier
  - `--prompt, -p`: Prompt for text generation (default: "The capital of France is")
  - `--n-predict, -n`: Number of tokens to generate (default: 100)
  - `--temperature`: Sampling temperature (default: 0.8)
  - `--top-k`: Top-k sampling (default: 40)
  - `--top-p`: Top-p sampling (default: 0.9)

- `up`: Upscale a model using HyperCloning
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier
  - `--output, -o`: Output path (auto-generated if not provided)
  - `--embed-dim-multiplier, -edm`: Integer multiplier for embedding dimensions
  - `--up-proj-multiplier, -upm`: Integer multiplier for FFN dimensions
  - `--snr-db`: Optional signal-to-noise ratio for adding noise

- `down`: Downscale a model (not yet implemented)
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier
  - `--output, -o`: Output path for downscaled model

Commit message:

upscaling support for: allenai/OLMo-2-0425-1B

README.md, after:

# dynamic-sizing-lm

Upscaling and Downscaling Language Models

## Upscaling

As introduced in the research paper "Scaling Smart: Accelerating Large Language Model Pre-training with Small Model Initialization," employs the HyperCloning method to efficiently transfer knowledge from a smaller pre-trained transformer-based LLM to a larger target LLM.

This function-preserving transformation expands the hidden dimensions of the source model, precisely mapping its linear layer parameters into the destination network so that the larger model exactly replicates the source’s hidden representations and output logits at initialization.

As a result, the upscaled LLM starts with the full accuracy of the smaller model, enabling faster convergence and improved performance through subsequent fine-tuning or continued pre-training—achieving superior results under limited computational budgets compared to training from scratch (see https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12903v2).

## Downscaling

TODO: A purely mathematical formulation for downscaling has not yet been established. While a rigorous mathematical approach is not strictly required, we believe it represents the optimal path forward. By analogy, just as HyperCloning enables fast and efficient upscaling, downscaling should achieve comparable speed and efficiency. Importantly, the downscaling method must be agnostic to the upscaling technique and operate effectively on any larger transformer-based LLM, regardless of whether HyperCloning was previously applied.

## Limitations

- Dense transformer LLMs only
- Text-to-text
- SmolLM2, SmolLM3 support
- Qwen2.5, Qwen3 support
- TinyLlama support
- Phi-1.5 support
- OLMo-2 support

### Parameter Scaling

The HyperCloning method scales model parameters approximately as follows:
- Hidden dimensions (embeddings, attention projections): scale with n² where n = embed_dim_multiplier
- FFN intermediate dimensions: scale with m² where m = up_proj_multiplier
- Total parameters ≈ original × (n² × weight_attention + m² × weight_ffn + linear_terms)

For ~2x parameter increase, use asymmetric scaling like embed_dim_multiplier=1, up_proj_multiplier=2 (scales FFN quadratically while keeping attention size constant).

### Upscaling Limitations

- The current implementation requires `embed_dim_multiplier` and `up_proj_multiplier` to be integers; fractional values are not supported
- Although the destination network's output is valid, it may not be perfectly aligned with the source network due to numerical precision issues
- For attention layers, we recommend modifying only the number of attention heads while keeping `head_size` unchanged, as altering `head_size` would significantly increase implementation complexity

## CLI Tool

The `dslm.py` script provides a command-line interface for upscaling and downscaling language models.

### Installation

Ensure you have the required dependencies installed:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Usage

#### Describing Models

Get detailed information about a model's architecture and parameters:

```bash
# Describe Qwen3-0.6B model
python dslm.py desc --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B

# Describe Qwen2.5-0.5B model
python dslm.py desc --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B

# Describe SmolLM2-360M model
python dslm.py desc --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-360M

# Describe SmolLM3-3B model
python dslm.py desc --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B

# Describe TinyLlama_v1.1 model
python dslm.py desc --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1

# Describe Phi-1.5 model
python dslm.py desc --input microsoft/phi-1_5

# Describe OLMo-2-0425-1B model
python dslm.py desc --input allenai/OLMo-2-0425-1B
```

#### Text Generation

Generate text using a model:

```bash
# Generate text with Qwen3-0.6B (default prompt)
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with Qwen2.5-0.5B (custom prompt)
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with SmolLM2-360M
python dslm.py gen --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-360M --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with SmolLM3-3B
python dslm.py gen --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with TinyLlama_v1.1
python dslm.py gen --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1 --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with Phi-1.5
python dslm.py gen --input microsoft/phi-1_5 --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with OLMo-2-0425-1B
python dslm.py gen --input allenai/OLMo-2-0425-1B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Generate text with custom sampling parameters
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --n-predict 50 --temperature 0.8 --top-k 40 --top-p 0.9 --prompt "The future of AI"
```

#### Upscaling Models

Upscale a model using the HyperCloning method. Note: Parameter count scales approximately with n² where n is the multiplier for hidden dimensions. For ~2x parameter increase, use asymmetric scaling (e.g., embed-dim-multiplier 1, up-proj-multiplier 2).

```bash
# Upscale Qwen3-0.6B for ~2x parameters (keep hidden size, double FFN)
python dslm.py up --input Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --embed-dim-multiplier 1 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen3-0.6B-1.0B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale Qwen2.5-0.5B for ~4x parameters (double both hidden and FFN dimensions)
python dslm.py up --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input Qwen2.5-0.5B-2.0B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale SmolLM2-360M for ~4x parameters with custom output path
python dslm.py up --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-360M --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2 --output SmolLM2-360M-1.4B
python dslm.py gen --input SmolLM2-360M-1.4B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale SmolLM3-3B for ~4x parameters
python dslm.py up --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2 --output SmolLM3-3B-12.3B
python dslm.py gen --input SmolLM3-3B-12.3B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale TinyLlama_v1.1 for ~4x parameters
python dslm.py up --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1 --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input TinyLlama_v1.1-4.1B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale Phi-1.5 for ~4x parameters
python dslm.py up --input microsoft/phi-1_5 --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input phi-1_5-5.3B --prompt "The future of AI is"

# Upscale OLMo-2-0425-1B for ~4x parameters
python dslm.py up --input allenai/OLMo-2-0425-1B --embed-dim-multiplier 2 --up-proj-multiplier 2
python dslm.py gen --input OLMo-2-0425-1B-4.1B --prompt "The future of AI is"
```

#### Downscaling (Not Yet Implemented)

Downscaling functionality is planned but not yet implemented:

```bash
# Downscale a large Qwen3 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input Qwen/Qwen3-1.2B --output Qwen3-0.6B

# Downscale a large Qwen2.5 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input Qwen/Qwen2.5-1B --output Qwen2.5-0.5B

# Downscale a large SmolLM2 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-1.4B --output SmolLM2-360M

# Downscale a large SmolLM3 model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B --output SmolLM3-3B

# Downscale a large TinyLlama model (example - not implemented)
python dslm.py down --input TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1 --output TinyLlama/TinyLlama_v1.1
```

### Command Reference

- `desc`: Describe model architecture and parameters
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier

- `gen`: Generate text using the model
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier
  - `--prompt, -p`: Prompt for text generation (default: "The capital of France is")
  - `--n-predict, -n`: Number of tokens to generate (default: 100)
  - `--temperature`: Sampling temperature (default: 0.8)
  - `--top-k`: Top-k sampling (default: 40)
  - `--top-p`: Top-p sampling (default: 0.9)

- `up`: Upscale a model using HyperCloning
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier
  - `--output, -o`: Output path (auto-generated if not provided)
  - `--embed-dim-multiplier, -edm`: Integer multiplier for embedding dimensions
  - `--up-proj-multiplier, -upm`: Integer multiplier for FFN dimensions
  - `--snr-db`: Optional signal-to-noise ratio for adding noise

- `down`: Downscale a model (not yet implemented)
  - `--input, -i`: Input model path or HuggingFace identifier
  - `--output, -o`: Output path for downscaled model
